Eric Chen\
ENGL 071B

Professor Schmidt

11/4/2019

Layli Long Soldier's "Three" challenges what it means to manipulate
form. "Three" consists of four sentences oriented at right angles to
each other, forming a square and thus rejecting an easily identifiable
beginning and end. These sentences themselves are not punctuated and are
often interrupted with irregular spacing. My verbal description cannot
suffice -- the poem is highly spatial and experiential in a way that
asks us to engage with it firsthand. With its sentences of varying
orientation (which make it nearly impossible to reproduce here), it asks
us to rotate the page and crane our necks in order to read it.

Thus the poem stretches form to its boundaries and seems to be in
constant cyclical motion as each sentence endlessly flows into the next,
closely resembling but varying each other in such a way as to make it
unclear what the "original" sentence is. But in each sentence appear the
words "place" and "space", invoking the literal and figurative
containment, enclosure, and marginalization of indigenous peoples in a
settler-colonial society. Soldier's poem invites us to *experience* the
historical and ongoing containment of indigenous peoples while at the
same time "*unsettling* the logics of containment" in critic Mishuana
Goeman's words.

Goeman argues that rather than assuming the meaning of the word "land",
we should put it under scrutiny. Land "is a keyword with much currency
... \[it\] is often conflated in indigenous studies to mean landscape,
place, territory, home, or all or some of these simultaneously. *Land*,
in this sense, carries a very important and heavy workload" (Goeman 71).
For Goeman, clarifying what land should mean is crucial because one
result of colonialism is a "translation or too easy collapsing of *land*
to *property*, a move that perpetuates the logics of containment"
(Goeman 72). Viewing land as a "linear time construct marked by supposed
shifting ownerships" bolsters "imperial geographies that order time and
space in hierarchies that erase and bury indigenous connections to place
and anesthetize settler-colonial histories" (Goeman 74). To elaborate, a
linear conception of land is one that forever moves forward, privileging
the present and the future over the past. Such a conception thus rapidly
dissolves the memory of a violent colonial past. Further, the "shifting
ownerships" in this conception work to destabilize the land, making it
easy to claim, to possess, and to define merely by possession. Goeman
suggests that we should instead be "conceiving of space as a node rather
than a linear time construct," and that we should define culture and
land as "meaning making rather than as differentiation and isolation in
a multicultural neoliberal model...a claimed object" (Goeman 74, 72).
After all, our society's conception of land is one that flattens its
multidimensional qualities into pure differentiation, temporal and
spatial: leases are marked with a start and an end, while lots are
contained within well-defined borders. In general, Goeman advocates for
an approach that emphasizes a flowing in rather than fading away, a
"connection rather than differentiation", one that relates "both
personal and communal experiences and histories to certain locations and
landscapes" (Goeman 74, 73). Soldier's poem confronts, critiques, and
resists our current way of viewing land, aiming to "unsettle the logics
of containment" and to move towards a less reductive and essentializing
conception of land.

Soldier appropriates the form and shape of containment through creating
a square poem, at once depicting and subverting it. We cannot speak of a
beginning; the squareness of the poem ensures a linear reading and
rejects an identification of start and end. Thus Soldier has taken the
square, a shape associated with and used to enact containment (through
allotment of reservation land, for example), to then reject the linear
logics of containment mentioned above that erase violent histories of
colonial dispossession. By refusing a linear conception of time and
space, Soldier thus invokes space as a node, remembering and
incorporating the violence of dispossession into the poem instead of
moving past it and leaving it behind. The reader must rotate the poem in
order for the four sentences to be legible, but in forcing the reader to
accept the four inward-facing sentences, Soldier contains and detains
the reader inside the walls of text. The North-oriented line reads as
follows:

"This is how you see me the space in which to place me"

Here the verb form of "place" is used, perhaps referencing forced
containment and suggesting that the "me" of the poem is an indigenous
subject and the "you" is a member of the colonizing society since the
speaker has passively been placed. Thus, the colonizer is indicted of
containing the indigenous subject, while simultaneously *being*
contained in a reversal of roles. Locked in the tangible box of the
poem, the colonial gaze is reversed. The colonial gaze is far from one
of neutral observation: I am reminded of Sarah (Saartjie) Baartman, the
South African Khoikhoi woman who was put on exhibition in 1810 London
for her large buttocks where "men and women of Britain's upper crust
gawked at, prodded, and squeezed these so-called human freaks" (Elkins).
The gaze upon Baartman was "a symbol of the alienation and degradations
of colonization... the expropriation of female labor and the sexual and
economic exploitation of black women by men," in English professor
Rachel Holmes's words (Elkins). The speaker in "Three", by containing
their colonizer within the poem, also puts them up for display, forcing
them to reckon with the legacy and ongoing effects of their colonial
gaze. The containment of the colonizer within the poem also bears an
uncanny resemblance to the opening of one of Terrance Hayes's poems
entitled "American Sonnet for my Past and Future Assassin:" "I lock you
in an American sonnet that is part prison, / Part panic closet, a little
room in a house set aflame" (Hayes). Both poets remember a past (and
future) violence and solidify their agency and subjectivity by reversing
its direction. Hayes achieves this through a tone that one might use to
cast a spell, while

the speaker in "Three" does it through form

legibility

what makes "Three" distinct? it does so through its form, through
invocation of legibility

then talk about this resistance w.r.t Rasmussen

RASUMUSSEN INDIGENOUS LITERACIES -- relate the gaze reversal and also
the literacy, deconstructing divisions of literacy/illiteracy

indignant? tone

this is how you see me? The space in which to place me?

to talk about lines: use directions instead of sequence/order, but then
talk about how we as the reader are positioned INSIDE the poem rather
than above/apart from it traditionally

talk about positionality of the reader? as white male and being
contained BY the poem,

Three: multidimensionality -\> breaks out of a square on paper, -\>
bring this up in the space in the East facing line

three forms of physical containment, three forms of containment -\> talk
about marginalization at some point

define land by its ownership -- the vice versa of this is the "first"
line of the poem

syntax of first sentence, "this is how you see me" selects for/attunes
to the second part

WORDS FORM BOUNDARIES -- are traditional boundaries silent? (e.g. what
can we say about this particular boundary, in relation to the thin lines
on Google Maps?)

reversal of types of containment: boarding school thru didactic tone,
reservation through the panoptical thing Goeman mentions, prison
through: *de*taining the reader

Works to cite:

Goeman

Soldier

Elkins <https://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/14/books/review/Elkins.t.html>
